Informed Delivery Narrative
Summary – To encourage more use of first-class mail, USPS tasked OPTiMO with conception and development of a modern, consumer-focused digital interface to mail called Informed Delivery. A cross-functional user experience design, application development, and systems integration project, the solution encompassed a full-stack application integrating a modern web interface and daily e-mail platform providing a single view of consumers’ incoming physical mail and packages. Informed Delivery has maintained a position as one of the most used web applications in the federal government today, according to analytics.usa.gov.
Contract Type: T&M  / Dollar Value: $24,758,031 / PoP: 06/09/2011 – 09/30/2019
Prime/Subcontractor: 100% passthrough Sub; as directed by USPS, OPTiMO self-performed the entire statement of work.

Task Area 2: CIO Support – OPTiMO was responsible for leading and implementing the IT governance framework, program management and measurement, and all business systems analysis for Informed Delivery.  Smoothly interfacing Agile-style software development with legacy operations teams was a key value-add for the CIO organization.

Task Area 3: Digital Media – Informed Delivery is an email service that manages, processes, and provides digital images of a subscriber’s incoming mail packages for that day. OPTiMO’s data architecture team organized a physical and logical data storage framework to laterally scale to its current 40-million-user load and beyond, maximizing use of infrastructure already in place.

Task Area 5: IT Operations and Maintenance  – Critical issues are addressed with emergency software changes; non-critical issues are added to the backlog and managed within the normal Agile process. With mail images originating from over 250 nationwide mail processing plants, OPTiMO developed monitoring software to detect, report, and alarm on system performance trends indicating potential issues before reaching a critical state, guiding infrastructure investments to maximize value-for-spend, as well as driving diagnosis of emergent infrastructure problems.

Task Area 6: Integration Services  – OPTiMO developed Informed Delivery to seamlessly integrate and operate with a dozen large, legacy downstream systems, including USPS enterprise systems comprising of the USPS Customer Registration System, USPS Engineering and Mail Processing Systems at more than 250 sites, USPS email infrastructure systems, and multiple security layers. 

Task Area 7: Critical Infrastructure Protection and Information Assurance  –  All code was developed with a security-first mindset, given the sensitive nature of the data.  End-to-end encryption of data both in motion and at rest was implemented to protect data, and still work with existing legacy USPS infrastructure with modular design allowing for swift recovery from hardware failures.

Task Area 8: Digital Government and Cloud Services – Informed Delivery is one of the most visible G2C programs. It provides a completely customizable interaction between USPS and its customers in mail products, retail, and customer service. OPTiMO developed portions of Informed Delivery on the USPS’s Azure Cloud instance to meet specific security and scalability requirements. 

Task Area 10: Software Development  – OPTiMO built the Informed Delivery application from the ground up, designed with a security-first mindset and an eye toward lateral scalability.  Using an agile development process, Informed Delivery rapidly adjusted to evolving needs and requirements from its business sponsor as well as the general public, as it reached a critical mass and the number of new users began to accelerate.  The system now supports 40 million active users, a number which increases by approximately 30,000 per day.  Informed Delivery was one of the first applications to implement a DevSecOps toolchain and CI pipeline within USPS.
